---
title: "How could we leverage AI to understand mass shootings?"
date: '2023-05-08'
---

It seems we are now on a weekly basis for mass shootings in the US, which is an awful truth to confront. As a parent, it's a concern you can't shake. What happens if someone in my family is in the wrong place at the wrong time. Sometimes I think about what would it would be like to be one of the parents who just lost their child. It's a pit of dispair so deep I care not to linger on those thoughts for very long.

The prevailing response has mostly been to (try to) pass legislation, plus thoughts and prayers; reactive responses that have done nothing to prevent future shootings. Even if the most extreme gun laws were passed, I don't think it would solve the problem. What are we doing beyond laws, in the way of research, to understand these seemingly chaotic and random events?

When you are new at software development, certain strange behaviors from your application at first appear totally random, at times it seems like they could only be explained by the metaphysical. But through trial and error, and deep dives, you learn there's always a rational cause. And you rediscover this over and over again. That was a huge revelation for me.

We are now in the midst of an AI revolution, and having worked with AI as a software engineer, I've seen how powerful it is. But I would like to know if AI is powerful enough to do more than create convenience for people. Given a huge, detailed dataset on mass shootings, what could AI tell us about them? I'm not suggesting AI could tell give us the "why", but that it could very likely give us some key insights. 

Whether or not use we AI, I think it's high time we start devoting significant resources to better understanding the phenomena of mass shootings that plagues our society, because the first step to solving a problem is understanding it.
